Tesla Motors: The Model 3 is ‘Miles Ahead of the Competition’
By 
Ben Levisohn
Updated April 1, 2016 10:20 am ET / Original April 1, 2016 10:19 am ET

After the launch of the Model 3 last night, Stifel's James Albertine and Maria Klioutcheva contend that Tesla Motors' (TSLA) is "miles ahead of the competition" but still see "substantial risks ahead." They explain why:

We are simply awestruck by the demand surfacing for the Model 3. While we have disagreed with traditional OEMs (comments circa 2008/09) and various investors (comments circa 2012-16) both of whom have questioned whether "demand exists" for electric vehicles, we had no idea the reservation orders would be this strong for the Model 3. We are actually disappointed, having been at various Tesla store locations yesterday, that we chose to wait for online ordering later in the evening. However, as we attempt to shake off enthusiasm and hunker down to do some fundamental analysis, our focus shifts to production. We originally launched coverage of Tesla with a Hold rating as we saw considerable obstacles, both financial and physical, with respect to battery and vehicle production. While the Model 3 will harness learnings from the Model S and X production lines, it will ultimately require an entirely new, high volume, manufacturing line. We do not know at this point whether the vehicle will incorporate greater use of steel vs. aluminum, nor do we have a sense of expected battery pack costs at the time of production, which provides a foundation for our Model 3 gross margin expectations over time. Our $325 target price is predicated on a model assuming 200k units produced annually in 2020, which is substantially lower than Tesla's guidance for 500k units annually. The initial Model 3 reservations reduce our concerns with respect to achieving management's guidance at some point in the next 5-7 years, but given the complexity associated with vehicle manufacturing and the fact that Tesla has little incentive (besides investor appetite for delivery growth and GAAP profitability) to accelerate production at the expense of quality, protecting against the risk of a major recall. However, we think reservations defend our belief that demand exists and the Model 3 is "miles ahead" of the "competition" on various fronts, reiterate Buy.

Shares of Tesla Motors have gained 3.9% to $238.78 at 10:16 a.m. today.
