Elon Musk Plugs New Truck Even as Model 3 Faces Delays
Tech company is set to unveil electric semitrailer truck on Thursday

By Tim Higgins
Follow
 and Bob Tita
Follow
Nov. 15, 2017 3:29 pm ET

Billionaire entrepreneur Elon Musk will find himself in a familiar place on Thursday night, pitching an unconventional idea to capture the imagination of investors—while his company Tesla Inc. TSLA 2.54%▲ is grinding through “production hell” with the Model 3 sedan.
This time, Mr. Musk will be promoting an electric semitrailer truck, which he has been trumpeting on Twitter for months. “This will blow your mind clear out of your skull and into an alternate dimension,” Mr. Musk, Tesla’s chief executive, promised in a tweet Sunday ahead of this week’s demo event in Hawthorne, Calif.
Tesla shares the next day soared 4%—the kind of pop that continues to fuel Tesla’s stock run this year as expectations build for Mr. Musk to fulfill his vision of a world complete with electric self-driving vehicles.
Similarly, Mr. Musk was touting plans for the Model 3 while Tesla struggled to ramp-up manufacturing of the Model X in 2015, and last year he hosted a flashy event laying out his vision for making solar-panel roofs sexy.
“It’s exceptionally clear that over time, product announcements have helped to bolster the stock and cover up shortfalls in deliveries or manufacturing issues,” said Mike Ramsey, an industry analyst for Gartner Inc.
See more...
The showman’s latest flourish comes as Tesla runs low on cash and struggles to mass-produce the Model 3, a $35,000 sedan that is the cornerstone of Mr. Musk’s plan to transform Tesla from being a niche luxury player to a mainstream auto maker.
Tesla has fallen behind its production goals for the Model 3 during the early manufacturing period that Mr. Musk has termed “production hell.” The company began production in July without its assembly system fully ready in Fremont, Calif., The Wall Street Journal has reported, and has cited issues at its battery factory in Nevada.
Tesla made just 260 Model 3s during the third quarter and pushed back its goal of making 5,000 version of the vehicles a week until late into first quarter from the fourth quarter. The Model 3 delay raises questions about Tesla’s ability to reach a goal of making a half-million vehicles, including the Model S and Model X, next year.
An electric truck isn’t a far-out idea for Tesla.
As with automobiles, Mr. Musk believes Tesla can transform the trucking industry by reducing emissions and improving safety. And at an average price of $120,000 to $150,000, a heavy-duty, diesel-powered truck costs as much as high-end versions of Tesla’s Model S sedan and Model X sport-utility vehicle.
Tesla’s electric truck, possibly two years away from entering production, “could be the biggest catalyst in trucking in decades,” Morgan Stanley analyst Ravi Shanker wrote in a note to investors in September. Piper Jaffray analyst Alexander Potter has said truck makers “would be wise to stymie their laughter” and take Mr. Musk’s plans seriously.
But unlike a luxury-car buyer, who is driven by emotion and desire, commercial trucks are largely a business expense for trucking companies. Truckers place a premium on reliability and are slow to embrace change without a clear cost benefit.
Electric trucks, particularly Tesla’s semi, will be traveling uphill to replace long-rang diesel trucks that have yielded better mileage in recent years.
Despite electricity’s kilowatt price advantage over a gallon of diesel or gasoline fuel, the initial cost of a heavy-duty electric truck could be significantly higher at $200,000 to $400,000 depending on the battery size, according to industry analysts. A large, heavy battery to give the truck a long range would likely reduce cargo capacity.
